Child labour
Child labour occurs when children get paid to do work. Although they have always had to work in some way, child labour started to become a major problem when children started to work in factories and mines in England during the Industrial Revolution of the 18th century . Many of them were very young. Factory owners forced them to work long hours and they got very little money for their work. Working conditions were very unhealthy. Factories were dirty and the air was bad. In mines children had to crawl through tunnels that were not wide enough for adults . Most children worked to help their families survive .
During the 19th century the situation of children started to improve . Most of them were able to go to school and lead a better life. In his novel "Oliver Twist" the famous English novelist, Charles Dickens, showed how factory work was ruining the lives of children in England.
Child labour today
Although many countries have laws that forbid child labour under a certain age, there are millions of children all over the world who are forced to work, especially in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Common for children is factory work, working on farms or even prostitution . Some work as tourists guides ; others sell things on the streets or are beggars . According to the United Nations there are about 200 million child workers all over the world. Among them are about a hundred million who work in dangerous jobs. Over 22,000 children die in accidents at work every year.
Most children in the Third World work in agriculture . In Brazil, for example, children work on sugar plantations , sometimes as young as four. Others work on the streets. They polish shoes, wash cars, carry luggage or do any chore that is thinkable. The majority live in slums on the edge of big cities.
Sometimes children are forced to be prostitutes or have to serve rebel or army groups in civil wars . In Iran, thousands of children served as soldiers in the war against Iraq during the 1980s.
Causes of child labour
One of the major causes of child labour is poverty . Adults often earn so little that children have to work.
Schools in many countries are far away or expensive.
More and more employers see that they can make bigger profits when they employ children.
In Africa, many children have become orphans because their mothers died of AIDS and they have nobody to care for them. 
Bonded labour
In bonded labour families often sell their children to factory owners in order to get money or they give them to employers if they owe them money. This type of labour is very common throughout southern Asia, especially the rural parts of India and Pakistan. Such children work up to 18 hours a day and often get very little food. There is seldom a way to escape bonded labour.
Dangerous jobs
Half the child labourers around the world work in jobs that are considered to be dangerous. Among them are
working with dangerous chemicals in factories
working in mines
prostitution
selling drugs
fighting in conflict areas
working on plantations in hot climates
Rights of children
The International Labour Organization has been fighting child labour for many decades . The United Nations declared that children must be protected from dangerous work. Over the past years many agreements , which protect the rights of children, have been signed .
The ILO has set 15 as the lowest age for legal employment . Although many countries have already applied this law , some countries in the Third World do not control it enough.
What needs to be done
Education is the key to ending child labour. If children go to schools they are less likely to work. A better education also means a better chance of getting a good job later on.
Women must get better jobs so that they can escape poverty and their children don't have to work.
Replace child workers with adults .
Consumers can help by refusing to buy products made by children. Sometimes there is a label on clothes or other items that indicate children are not involved in manufacturing them.